================
Adding a new PCS
================

This section explains how to add a new Performance Checking Sheet (PCS) to
the DyCoV codebase. There are two scenarios depending on whether the new PCS
can be built on existing validation tests or requires implementing a new one.

Before starting, it helps to understand where the relevant files live.


Where PCS definitions live
---------------------------

DyCoV maintains two separate template trees:

* ``src/dycov/templates/`` — the built-in PCS definitions shipped with the
  code. This is where all changes described in this section go.
* ``~/.config/dycov/templates/`` — user-side overrides and additions, not
  under source control. These are described in the User Manual.

The tree under ``src/dycov/templates/`` is organized as follows:

.. code-block:: text

   src/dycov/templates/
   ├── PCS/
   │   ├── model/
   │   │   ├── BESS/
   │   │   └── PPM/
   │   └── performance/
   │       ├── BESS/
   │       ├── PPM/
   │       └── SM/
   ├── inputs/
   │   ├── model/
   │   └── performance/
   └── reports/
       ├── model/
       └── performance/


.. _scenario_a:

Scenario A — New PCS using existing tests
------------------------------------------

If all the tests you need are already implemented in DyCoV, adding a new PCS
is purely a matter of configuration and templates — no Python code changes
are required.

Step 1: Create the PCS configuration
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Create a directory for the new PCS under the appropriate category in
``src/dycov/templates/PCS/``. For example, for a new model validation PCS
for PPM:

.. code-block:: text

   src/dycov/templates/PCS/model/PPM/PCS_RTE-I16zX/

Inside it, create ``PCSDescription.ini`` following the structure of an
existing PCS (e.g. ``PCS_RTE-I16z1/PCSDescription.ini``). This file defines:

* the benchmarks belonging to the PCS,
* the operating conditions (OC) for each benchmark,
* the validation tests to execute (referencing existing test names),
* the curves required for each OC report.

If a benchmark requires a network impedance table, place the files in a
subdirectory named after the benchmark:

.. code-block:: text

   src/dycov/templates/PCS/model/PPM/PCS_RTE-I16zX/
   ├── PCSDescription.ini
   └── GridVoltageDip/
       ├── TableInfiniteBus.txt
       └── TableVariableImpedance.txt

Step 2: Add reference curve DICT files
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

For each OC of the new PCS, add a ``.dict`` file under the appropriate
``inputs/`` path:

.. code-block:: text

   src/dycov/templates/inputs/model/PPM/ReferenceCurves/Producer/
       PCS_RTE-I16zX.<Benchmark>.<OC>.dict

DICT files map DyCoV-expected signal names to curve columns and provide event
metadata. Use an existing ``.dict`` from the same benchmark family as a
reference.

Step 3: Create the report templates
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Create a directory for the PCS under ``src/dycov/templates/reports/``:

.. code-block:: text

   src/dycov/templates/reports/model/PPM/PCS_RTE-I16zX/

Inside it, add:

* One LaTeX template per OC: ``report.<Benchmark>.<OC>.tex``
* A top-level summary template: ``report.RTE-I16zX.tex``
* A ``Makefile`` (copy from an existing PCS and update the report name)

Templates use Jinja2 syntax adapted for LaTeX. The substitution variables
available in templates are generated by ``_pcs_replace`` in
``src/dycov/report/report.py`` and include per-OC maps for results,
compliance checks, thresholds, signal errors, and time characteristics.
See :ref:`Scenario B — exposing results in the report <report_maps>` for
details on the available prefixes.


.. _scenario_b:

Scenario B — New PCS with a new validation test
-------------------------------------------------

If the new PCS requires a test that is not yet implemented, complete all steps
in :ref:`Scenario A <scenario_a>` first, then follow the steps below.

Step 4: Register the test in ``benchmark.py``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Open ``src/dycov/model/benchmark.py`` and locate
``__initialize_validation_by_benchmark``.

Register the new test by adding a call to ``compliance_list.append``:

.. code-block:: python

   # For a performance test:
   compliance_list.append(
       validations, pcs_benchmark_name, "Performance-Validations", "my_new_test"
   )

   # For a model validation test:
   compliance_list.append(
       validations, pcs_benchmark_name, "Model-Validations", "my_new_test"
   )

The string ``"my_new_test"`` must match the key used in ``PCSDescription.ini``
to associate the test with the PCS.

Step 5: Implement the test logic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Depending on the test type, add the implementation to the appropriate
validator class:

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 30 40 30

   * - Test type
     - File
     - Class
   * - Electrical Performance verification
     - ``src/dycov/validation/performance.py``
     - ``PerformanceValidator``
   * - RMS model validation
     - ``src/dycov/validation/model.py``
     - ``ModelValidator``
   * - Shared utilities
     - ``src/dycov/validation/common.py``
     - (module-level functions)

Add a private method to the appropriate class following existing patterns
(``__check_*`` for checks, ``__calculate_*`` for computations). Call it from
``__check`` or ``__calculate``, guarded by ``compliance_list.contains_key``:

.. code-block:: python

   if compliance_list.contains_key(["my_new_test"], self._validations):
       self.__check_my_new_test(results)

Store all outputs in the ``results`` dict:

.. code-block:: python

   results["my_new_test_value"] = computed_value
   results["my_new_test_check"] = computed_value < threshold
   results["compliance"] &= results["my_new_test_check"]

.. _report_maps:

Step 6: Expose the result in the report
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The ``_pcs_replace`` function in ``src/dycov/report/report.py`` assembles
the substitution maps that populate the LaTeX templates. The existing map
modules and their Jinja prefixes are:

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 35 15 50

   * - Module
     - Prefix
     - Content
   * - ``results.py``
     - ``rm<OC>``
     - Overall pass/fail and computed values
   * - ``compliance.py``
     - ``cm<OC>``
     - Per-criterion compliance checks
   * - ``thresholds.py``
     - ``thm<OC>``
     - Threshold values
   * - ``signal_error.py``
     - ``em<OC>``
     - MAE / ME / MXE per signal
   * - ``steady_state_error.py``
     - ``ssem<OC>``
     - Steady-state error
   * - ``characteristics_response.py``
     - ``tem<OC>``
     - Reaction / rise / settling times
   * - ``active_power_recovery.py``
     - ``apr<OC>``
     - Active power recovery indicators

Where ``<OC>`` is derived from the operating condition name by removing the
case separator and ``_RTE-`` (e.g. ``PCS_RTE-I16z1.Benchmark.Rise`` →
``I16z1BenchmarkRise``).

If the new result fits an existing module, add it there. If it introduces a
genuinely new category, create a new map module and register it in
``_pcs_replace``:

.. code-block:: python

   my_new_map = my_new_module.create_map(oc_results)
   subst_dict = subst_dict | {"mynew" + operating_condition_: my_new_map}

Then reference the new Jinja variable in the LaTeX template.


Validation
----------

After adding the new PCS, verify the full pipeline end to end:

1. Run the test suite to check for regressions:

   .. code-block:: console

      pytest tests/

2. Add an example case under ``examples/`` that exercises the new PCS.

3. Run DyCoV against it:

   .. code-block:: console

      dycov validate examples/<your_new_case>/ReferenceCurves/ \
                     -m examples/<your_new_case>/Dynawo/ \
                     -p PCS_RTE-I16zX

4. Inspect the generated PDF report and HTML plots for correctness.

5. Add unit tests under ``tests/`` covering the new test logic.