
===========================

DESIGN SPECIFICATION

(c) 2022 RTE
Developed by Grupo AIA

===========================


# Architecture

## Organization of the code

### Main

Currently, this script is too long and includes methods that are not
necessary, and can be moved to other scripts.  First of all, we must
remove the variant management for the test files from the main module,
this first level of the code only needs to know that it has to do a
test with a certain number of files and place the results in the final
directories.  The command that allows the execution of the Dynawo
application, which is currently in the main, will now have its own
script called Dynawo, and possibly it will be placed in a directory
with the same name. For the execution of the simulation, the 'execute'
or 'simulate' method of the mentioned script will be called, this
method should simplify the reading of the code, since some of the
tests that request the cards will cause several Dynawo simulations to
be executed. You don't want to have multiple system calls spread
across different scripts.

### Organization of the scripts

To facilitate the reading of the code, it is proposed to organize the
existing scripts, as well as future ones, in the following modules:

  - Configuration: The Configuration folder is essential for managing the 
  tool's setup, containing all necessary files and scripts. It includes 
  configuration parameters to customize tool behavior, test scripts for 
  validating functionality, and resources for generating figures. This 
  folder is crucial for ensuring the tool operates as intended in various 
  environments.
  
  - Core: The folder houses the primary scripts essential to the tool's 
  operation. This includes the initialization scripts, simulation scripts 
  for running cases, and validation scripts to validate it, among others.
  
  - Curves: The Curves folder is designated for storing all the code that 
  handles, saves, imports, modifies, and manages the curves used in the tool. 
  This folder is essential for ensuring that all curve-related operations are 
  efficiently organized and accessible.
  
  - Dynawo: Contains the code used to work with Dynawo. This includes 
  managing models, running simulations, adapting variables, compiling models, 
  and other related tasks. It serves as the hub for all operations involving 
  Dynawo within the tool.
  
  - Electrical: This directory contains all the scripts with the
  calculations of the electrical variables that depend on the network
  modeled by the user. See calculation of infinite bus voltages,
  and/or producer generator, line reactance, etc.
  
  - Files: This directory contains all the scripts whose purpose is to
  manage files and/or replace template placeholders, in order to
  obtain the input files for the simulation of each fiche.
  
  - Logging: The Logging folder is dedicated to managing and configuring 
  the tool's logging system. It contains all the necessary files and 
  scripts to set up, customize, and control how logging is performed, 
  ensuring that all relevant activities and errors are accurately recorded 
  and monitored.
  
  - Model: Contains the model definition based around the concept of the 
  **PCS**, as defined by RTE's DTR document. When one translates the tests 
  defined by the DTR PCSs into actual simulations, it is observed that the 
  PCSs implicitly define a hierarchy of logical concepts. To reflect this 
  hierarchy in unambiguous terms, the following terminology has been adopted:
  PCS ==> Benchmarks ==> OperatingPoint.
  
  - Model lib: Contains the collection of models used in simulations. 
  This folder serves as a repository for all simulation models, providing 
  the necessary resources to accurately run and analyze different scenarios 
  within the tool.
  
  - Report: This directory contains the scripts that allow you to
  create and collect the graphs, tables and data necessary to generate
  the final PDF with the analysis of each fiche. In case the module
  expands a lot, the possibility of adding subdirectories will be
  studied, leaving in the main directory the scripts that collect the
  necessary information to create the final PDF and placing the more
  specific scripts in the subdirectories, such as a subdirectory
  called Tables, which contains the scripts where the tables are
  generated with a specific format, or another called Charts with the
  scripts to generate the graphs.
  
  - Sigpro: Responsible for signal processing. It contains the code and 
  resources necessary for handling, analyzing, and processing signals within 
  the tool.
  
  - Templates: The Templates folder stores all the templates for inputs, PCS, 
  and reports used by the tool.
  
  - Validation: The Tests folder contains the code responsible for executing 
  electrical tests, including performance tests, sanity checks, and comparison 
  tests, among others.


## Executing a Fiche

All files generated by the application will be stored in a tmp
directory located in the output directory. Once the execution of each
individual file has finished correctly, the files specified in the
following section will be copied to the output directory.  The tmp
directory must always be deleted at the end of the application
execution if the user has not expressly specified that he wishes to
keep it by using the --debug flag when executing the application.


## Presentation of a simulated Fiche

The PDF report of the analysis of a Fiche must be saved in the output
directory specified by the user or one by default. If a File requests
to perform several simulations with variants in the inputs, an
individual subdirectory will be created for each variant where the
final report of each simulation will be saved.  In addition to the
report, the files used as input for the Fiche simulation must be saved
in the output directory. If there are variants to simulate, the input
files of each variant will be stored in the corresponding
subdirectories.  Similarly, the output files of the main Dynawo
simulation must be stored.





# Configuration

## INI file structure

The INI file is a text file where each line represents a configurable
variable within the application. The variable is informed following
the following pattern:

  ```
  key = value
  ```
   
Additionally, the lines of the file will be grouped into sections
where all the variables that make up a section must be related to each
other and to the title of the section. This file must allow comments
to be included following the pattern:
      
  ```
  # comments
  ```

The sections that make up the file are listed below:

  - Global: Parameters that allow you to modify the operation of the tool.

  - Figures: These parameters are used when the tool sets the visible range 
  on the X/Y axes of report figures.

  - Dynawo: All the variables that allow configuring the type of
  simulation to be carried out in Dynawo are reported. Variables such
  as the duration of the simulation, debug options if considered
  appropriate, type of solver if necessary, etc.
  
  - GridCode: In this section, the variables informed in the DTR
  that do not depend on the different fiches of the document are
  configured. Variables such as line reactance, Udim, etc.
  
  - CurvesVariables: Allows you to add and/or remove curves in the dynamic 
  simulation.

There are two INI files: one is internal to the application, containing the
default values for _all_ configurable variables; the other belongs to the user
(located at $HOME/.config) and allows to override virtually any variable
in the application INI.

When the application requires the use of the variables configured in
INI files, the following priority rule will be followed:

  1. If the requested variable has been configured by the user, this
     value takes precedence over all available options.
  
  2. In the event that the user does not configure the requested variable, the
     default value present in the application INI file will be used.





# DTR Sheets: our implementation

This chapter describes our implementation of the DTR Sheets. We say
`our` because the DTR is sometimes ambiguous or even contradictory in
some of the details, and also because some of the tests are not done
(e.g., we do not do three-phase simulations in the case of PPM
Sheets).

Nomenclature: Sheets ending in **SM** are for Synchronous Machines,
and those ending in **PPM** are for Power Park Modules (wind & solar
farms).




## Sheet I3SM

_Applies to generator classes: B, C, D_

Checks for compliant behavior of the generator under a scenario where there is a
sudden change in the admittance of the connection to the network (loss of one of
the three transmission lines, i.e. a 33% loss in branch admittance).

The opening of the line (Line3) takes place at an instant of time denoted by
**T_{event}**.


### Initialization

The following values are specified at the PDR bus at the start of the
simulation:
  * P = P_{max_unité}
  * Q = 0
  * U = U_{dim}


### Magnitudes to plot (curves)

The following 6 curves are the same for Sheets I3 and I4:
1. Voltage at connection point: modulus of `(bus_terminal_V_re,
   bus_terminal_V_im)`, at the PDR bus.
2. Reactive power supplied at the connection point: sum of `line_Q2Pu` over all
   lines on RTE side.
3. Active power supplied at the connection point: sum of `line_P2Pu` over all
   lines on RTE side.
4. Rotor speed: `generator_omegaPu`.
5. Plant-level voltage regulation setpoint: `voltageRegulator_UsRefPu`.
6. Magnitude controlled by the Plant-level voltage regulation: `generator_UStatorPu_value`.


### Analyses to perform

1. Find the `settling time T_{10P}`: time at which the supplied power P stays
   inside the +/-10% "tube" centered on the final value of P.
2. Find the `settling time T_{5P}`: time at which the supplied power P stays
   inside the +/-5% "tube" centered on the final value of P.


### Compliance checks to perform

1. Check that the generator remains stable:
   a) Check that the generator protections (if any) have not disconnected it.
   b) Check that the rotor angle *generator_theta* has stabilized to a
      steady-state value (presumably this angle should be within +/- 90º?).
2. Check that `T_{10p} - T_{event} < 5 sec`
3. Check that `T_{5p} - T_{event} < 10 sec`




## Sheet I4SM

_Applies to generator classes: B, C, D_

Checks for compliant behavior of the generator under a scenario where there is a
symmetric three-phase fault at one of the four transmission lines (at a 1%
distance from the PDR).

In Dynawo this has been modeled by splitting Line4 into Line4a and Line4b, and
then inserting an intermediate bus between them, in which a `NodeFault` model is
attached.

There are two relevant events at play here:
  * `T_{fault}`, time at which the short-circuit takes place. This becomes the
    default reference when checking for compliance times.
  * `T_{clear}`, time at which the line (actually, both Line4a and Line4b) is
    disconnected at both ends.

`T_{clear}` is a parameter that is specified in the DTR and depends on the
voltage level in question.


### Initialization

The following values are specified at the PDR bus at the start of the
simulation:
  * P = P_{max_unité}
  * Q = 0
  * U = U_{dim}


### Magnitudes to plot (curves)

These 6 curves are the same for Sheets I3 and I4:
1. Voltage at connection point: modulus of `(bus_terminal_V_re,
   bus_terminal_V_im)`, at the PDR bus.
2. Reactive power supplied at the connection point: sum of `line_Q2Pu` over all
   lines on RTE side.
3. Active power supplied at the connection point: sum of `line_P2Pu` over all
   lines on RTE side.
4. Rotor speed: `generator_omegaPu`.
5. Plant-level voltage regulation setpoint: `voltageRegulator_UsRefPu`.
6. Magnitude controlled by the Plant-level voltage regulation: `generator_UStatorPu_value`.


### Analyses to perform

1. Find the *settling time* `T_{10P}`: time at which the power supplied P stays
   within the +/-10% tube centered on the final value of P.
2. Find the *settling time* `T_{5P}`: time at which the power supplied P stays
   within the +/-5% tube centered on the final value of P.
3. Find the *rise time* `T_{85U}`: time at which the voltage at the PDR bus
   returns back above 0.85pu, regardless of any possible
   overshooting/undershooting that may take place later on.
4. Calculate the critical clearing time `T_{cct}`, i.e., the
   time-threshold for the onset of rotor-angle stability. Search for
   it using the bisection method, monitoring the variable
   `generator_theta`. Start with an initial window of t=(20ms, 50s).


### Compliance checks to perform

1. Check that the generator remains stable:
   a) Check that the generator protections (if any) have not disconnected it.
   b) Check that the rotor angle `generator_theta` has stabilized to a
      steady-state value (presumably this angle should be within +/- 90º?).
2. Check that:
   * `(T_{10p} - T_{85U}) < 5 sec`
   * `(T_{10p} - T_{clear}) < 5 sec`
3. Check that:
   * `(T_{5p} - T_{85U}) < 10 sec`
   * `(T_{5p} - T_{clear}) < 10 sec`





## Sheet I6SM

_Applies to generator classes: B, C, D_

Checks for compliant behavior of the generator under a scenario where there is a
severe drop of voltage at the PDR bus (which simulates the effect of a fault).

Contrary to the modeling that the DTR suggests for this Sheet, which uses a
variable shunt impedance Zv and a short-circuit network impedance Zcc, here the
voltage drop is simulated via a variable Infinite Bus source (Modelica model
`ControllableSource`), directly attached to the PDR bus, and for which we
specify a voltage curve that faithfully follows the shape prescribed by Sheet
I6.

In this Sheet there are several "events", corresponding to the changes in that
voltage curve:
1. At t = `T_{0}`, voltage drops to `U_{fault}`
2. At t = `T_{clear}`, voltage rises to `U_{clear}`
3. At t = `T_{rec1}`, voltage starts ramping up linearly, from
   `U_{clear}` to `U_{rec2}` (reached at t = `T_{rec2}`).
4. At t = `T_{rec2}` the voltage stops ramping up and remains at
   `U_{rec2}` indefinitely.

These values of time and voltage are specified by the DTR as follows. Remember
that the classification of generators into class A, B, C, D, is in the DTR under
Chapter 5, Article 5.1.1, Section 3.  See the reminder in the document
`Summary_data_from_the_DTR.md`).

For generator units of classes B and C:

|  variable       | for HTB1           | other Volt Levels  |
|-----------------|--------------------|--------------------|
|  `U_{initial}`  |  1.0 pu            |  1.0 pu            |
|  `T_{0}`        |  (free)            |  (free)            |
|  `U_{fault}`    |  0.05 pu           |  0.05 pu           |
|  `T_{clear}`    |  `T_{0}` + 250 ms  |  `T_{0}` + 150 ms  |
|  `U_{clear}`    |  0.7 pu            |  0.7 pu            |
|  `T_{rec1 }`    |  `T_{0}` + 750 ms  |  `T_{0}` + 700 ms  |
|  `T_{rec2 }`    |  `T_{0}` + 1550 ms |  `T_{0}` + 1500 ms |
|  `U_{rec2}`     |  0.9 pu            |  0.9 pu            |


For generator units of class D:

|  variable       | for HTB2           | other Volt Levels  |
|-----------------|--------------------|--------------------|
|  `U_{initial}`  |  1.0 pu            |  1.0 pu            |
|  `T_{0}`        |  (free)            |  (free)            |
|  `U_{fault}`    |  0.00 pu           |  0.00 pu           |
|  `T_{clear}`    |  `T_{0}` + 250 ms  |  `T_{0}` + 150 ms  |
|  `U_{clear}`    |  0.5 pu            |  0.5 pu            |
|  `T_{rec1 }`    |  `T_{0}` + 750 ms  |  `T_{0}` + 700 ms  |
|  `T_{rec2 }`    |  `T_{0}` + 1400 ms |  `T_{0}` + 1350 ms |
|  `U_{rec2}`     |  0.9 pu            |  0.9 pu            |


### Initialization

The following values are specified at the PDR bus at the start of the
simulation:
  * P = P_{max_unité}
  * Q = 0
  * U = U_dim


### Magnitudes to plot (curves)

These are the same as those of Sheets I3 & I4, with the addition of one
more, the generator's internal angle:
1. Voltage at connection point: modulus of `(bus_terminal_V_re,
   bus_terminal_V_im)`, at the PDR bus.
2. Reactive power Q supplied at the connection point. In this case there are no
   connection lines, therefore the flow has to be calculated by means of the
   "terminal equipment" connected at the PDR bus on RTE's side, which in this
   case is one single `ControllableSource` object.
   [TODO: find out what variables are provided by this object, in order to get the PQ flows.]
3. Active power P supplied at the connection point.  Same as for the Q flow
   mentioned above.
4. Rotor speed: `generator_omegaPu`.
5. Plant-level voltage regulation setpoint: `voltageRegulator_UsRefPu`.
6. Magnitude controlled by the Plant-level voltage regulation: `generator_UStatorPu_value`.
7. The generator's internal angle: `generator_thetaInternal_value`


### Analyses to perform

1. Find the *settling time* `T_{10P}`: time at which the power supplied P stays
   within the +/-10% tube centered on the final value of P. [Note: the exact
   wording of the DTR suggests that the tube is to be centered on P_{max_unité},
   but RTE was consulted and it was decided that the correct interpretation is
   that the tube center should be the final steady state value of P, as it is
   done in Fiche I4.]
   
2. Find the *rise time* `T_{85U}`: time at which the voltage at the PDR bus
   returns back above 0.85pu, regardless of any possible
   overshooting/undershooting that may take place later on.


### Compliance checks to perform

1. Check that the generator remains stable:
   a) Check that the generator protections (if any) have not disconnected it.
   b) Check that the rotor angle *generator_theta* has stabilized to a
      steady-state value (presumably this angle should be within +/- 90º?).

2. Check that the auxiliary loads also remain stable; in this case this just
   means checking that the load protections (if any) have not disconnected it.

3. Check that:
   * `(T_{10P} - T_{85U}) < 5 sec`





## Sheet I7SM

_Applies to generator classes: B, C, D_

Checks for compliant behavior of the generator under a scenario where there is a
severe overvoltage at the PDR bus (which simulates the effect of clearing a
fault in the network).

Contrary to the modeling that the DTR suggests for this Sheet, which uses a
variable shunt impedance Zv, here the voltage surge is simulated via a variable
Infinite Bus source (Modelica model `ControllableSource`), directly attached to
the PDR bus, and for which we specify a voltage curve that faithfully follows
the shape prescribed by Sheet I7.

In this Sheet there are several "events", corresponding to the changes in that
voltage curve:
1. At t = `T_{0}`, voltage surges to `U_{surge}`
2. At t = `T_{rec1}`, voltage drops to `U_{rec2}`
3. At t = `T_{rec2}`, voltage drops to `U_{rec3}`
4. At t = `T_{rec3}`, voltage drops to `U_{rec4}`

These values of time and voltage are specified by the DTR as follows:

|  variable       | all Volt Levels    |
|-----------------|--------------------|
|  `U_{initial}`  |  1.0 pu            |
|  `T_{0}`        |  (free)            |
|  `U_{surge}`    |  1.3 pu            |
|  `T_{rec1}`     |  `T_{0}` + 50 ms   |
|  `U_{rec2}`     |  1.25 pu           |
|  `T_{rec2}`     |  `T_{0}` + 2.5 s   |
|  `U_{rec3}`     |  1.15 pu           |
|  `T_{rec3}`     |  `T_{0}` + 30 s    |
|  `U_{rec4}`     |  1.10 pu           |


Note that the simulation should at least go on for another 30s or so, in order
to allow enough time to reach the steady state in cases with long time
oscillations. Therefore, the **minimum duration time** for the simulation should
be 60 seconds plus whatever lead time is used before the first event (i.e.,
`T_{0}` seconds).


### Initialization

Two different simulations are specified by the DTR.

Scenario 1: using the following values at the PDR bus at the start of the
simulation:
  * P = P_{max_unité}
  * Q = Q_{max}
  * U = U_dim

Scenario 2: using the following values at the PDR bus at the start of the
simulation:
  * P = P_{max_unité}
  * Q = Q_{min}
  * U = U_dim


### Magnitudes to plot (curves)

These are the same as those of Sheets I3 & I4, with the addition of one
more, the generator's internal angle (just like Sheet I6):
1. Voltage at connection point: modulus of `(bus_terminal_V_re,
   bus_terminal_V_im)`, at the PDR bus.
2. Reactive power Q supplied at the connection point. Same as for the
   P flow mentioned above.
3. Active power P supplied at the connection point. In this case there
   are no connection lines, therefore the flow has to be calculated by
   means of the "terminal equipment" connected at the PDR bus on RTE's
   side, which in this case is one single `ControllableSource`
   object. [TODO: find out what variables are provided by this object
   in order to get the flow P.]
4. Rotor speed: `generator_omegaPu`.
5. Plant-level voltage regulation setpoint: `voltageRegulator_UsRefPu`.
6. Magnitude controlled by the Plant-level voltage regulation: `generator_UStatorPu_value`.
7. The generator's internal angle: `generator_thetaInternal_value`


### Analyses to perform

None.


### Compliance checks to perform

1. Check that the generator remains stable:
   a) Check that the generator protections (if any) have not disconnected it.
   b) Check that the rotor angle *generator_theta* has stabilized to a
      steady-state value (presumably this angle should be within +/- 90º?).





## Sheet I8SM

_Applies to generator classes: B, C, D_

Checks for compliant behavior of the generator under a scenario where there is a
severe loss of load in the bulk transmission network: 7GW out of 307GW. In this
case the network side is simulated by means of a large generator (340 GVA) and
two large loads (300 and 7 GW).

The relevant event here is `T_{ldshed}`, time at which the 7GW load is disconnected.


### Initialization

The following values are specified at the PDR bus at the start of the
simulation:
  * P = P_{max_unité}
  * Q = 0
  * U = U_dim


### Magnitudes to plot (curves)

The curves to plot are the same as those in Sheets I3 and I4. **However**, Sheet
I8 mentions that the expected frequency excursion will be, at most, 250 mHz; and
that the resulting frequency rise at steady state will be around 200
mHz. Therefore, **in addition** to those 6 curves, this Fiche should also show a
graph for the **network frequency**, in order to monitor that this is indeed the
case.

The curves:

1. Voltage at connection point: modulus of `(bus_terminal_V_re,
   bus_terminal_V_im)`, at the PDR bus.
2. Reactive power supplied at the connection point: sum of `line_Q2Pu` over all
   lines on RTE side.
3. Active power supplied at the connection point: sum of `line_P2Pu` over all
   lines on RTE side.
4. Rotor speed: `generator_omegaPu`.
5. Plant-level voltage regulation setpoint: `voltageRegulator_UsRefPu`.
6. Magnitude controlled by the Plant-level voltage regulation: `generator_UStatorPu_value`. Show with
   dashed lines a +/-%5 tube centered around the Plant-level voltage regulation setpoint (this
   corresponds to compliance check No. 2 below).
7. Network frequency: `generator_omegaRefPu` (see note below). Show
   dashed horizontal lines marking the maximum excursion values
   (+/-250 mHz for the transient and +/-200mHz for the final steady
   state, both referred to the starting value of the frequency).

Note on reading variable `generator_omegaRefPu`: in this case there are two
generators, the producer's and the one on the network side. We can obtain the
curve values from either one, as they are guaranteed to be the same (it's the
network-wide value of frequency, which is signaled to all generators).


### Analyses to perform

No calculations are needed, other that the steady-state error of the
stator voltage, which will be needed to verify the compliance test (2)
below.


### Compliance checks to perform

1. Check that the generator remains synchronized (i.e., stable):
   a) Check that the generator protections (if any) have not disconnected it.
   b) Check that the rotor angle `generator_theta` has stabilized to a
      steady-state value (presumably this angle should be within +/- 90º?).
      
2. Check that the magnitude controlled by the Plant-level voltage regulation (`generator_UStatorPu_value`)
   never deviates more than 5% from its setpoint. This deviation is calculated
   as:
     ```
     `abs(generator_UStatorPu_value - voltageRegulator_UsRefPu`) / voltageRegulator_UsRefPu`
     ```
   (see the Jinja placeholder variable `statorUsserr` in the LaTeX template)




## Sheet I10SM

_Applies to generator classes: C, D_

Checks for compliant behavior of the generator under an islanding event
scenario, i.e., the network has been split in such a way that the generator is
left as the only synchronous machine that should sustain the frequency of its
subnetwork. The generator should maintain the stability until the restoration
process re-synchronizes this subnetwork with the bulk transmission network.

In this case the network is not modeled. In Dynawo, we simply attach two loads
of type LoadPQ (since the DTR specifies that the loads have alpha=beta=0 and do
not depend on frequency). With PQ values as follows:
  * Load 1: P = 0.7/0.9 Pmax, Q = +/- 0.04 Pmax
  * Load 2: P = +/-0.1 Pmax,  Q = -/+ 0.04 Pmax
  
And then disconnect Load 2. This complies with the initial conditions and the
desired changes specified by the DTR. Note that, since the variations of P and Q
could be either positive or negative, there should be four different scenarios
to simulate:
1.  Load 2: P = +0.1 Pmax, Q = + 0.04 Pmax  (Load 1: P = 0.7 Pmax, Q = -0.04 Pmax)
2.  Load 2: P = +0.1 Pmax, Q = - 0.04 Pmax  (Load 1: P = 0.7 Pmax, Q = +0.04 Pmax)
3.  Load 2: P = -0.1 Pmax, Q = + 0.04 Pmax  (Load 1: P = 0.9 Pmax, Q = -0.04 Pmax)
4.  Load 2: P = -0.1 Pmax, Q = - 0.04 Pmax  (Load 1: P = 0.9 Pmax, Q = +0.04 Pmax)

The relevant event here is `T_{ldshed}`, time at which the load 2 is
disconnected.


### Initialization

At the start of the simulation, all four scenarios have the following values
specified at the PDR bus:
  * P = 0.8 P_{max_unité}
  * Q = 0
  * U = U_dim
  * f = 50 Hz (this is always the default in Dynawo)


### Magnitudes to plot (curves)

The curves to plot are the same as for Sheet I8, except that **the
dashed lines in curve 7** are representing different limits:
1. Voltage at connection point: modulus of `(bus_terminal_V_re,
   bus_terminal_V_im)`, at the PDR bus.
2. Reactive power supplied at the connection point: sum of `load_QPu` over all
   loads connected at the PDR bus on RTE side.
3. Active power supplied at the connection point: sum of `load_PPu` over all
   loads connected at the PDR bus on RTE side.
4. Rotor speed: `generator_omegaPu`.
5. Plant-level voltage regulation setpoint: `voltageRegulator_UsRefPu`.
6. Magnitude controlled by the Plant-level voltage regulation: `generator_UStatorPu_value`.
7. Network frequency, with dashed horizontal lines marking the
   compliance limits: 49 Hz and 51 Hz. Take this value from variable
   `generator_omegaRefPu`. Note that since in this case the Producer's
   generator is the only one on the island, this curve will be (must
   be!) exactly the same as curve 4 above.


### Analyses to perform

None.


### Compliance checks to perform

1. Check that the generator remains synchronized (i.e., stable):
   a) Check that the generator protections (if any) have not disconnected it.
   b) Check that the rotor angle `generator_theta` has stabilized to a
      steady-state value (presumably this angle should be within +/- 90º?).
      
2. Check that the frequency:
   a) Stays always above 49 Hz.
   b) Stays always below 51 Hz.




## Sheet I5PPM

_Applies to PPM classes: B, C, D, and Offshore_

Checks for compliant behavior of the PPM under a scenario where there is a
symmetric three-phase fault at one of the four transmission lines (at a 1%
distance from the PDR). The PPM should remain connected and be able to supply
the necessary reactive injection.

In Dynawo this fault has been modeled by splitting Line4 into Line4a and Line4b,
and then inserting an intermediate bus between them, to which a `NodeFault`
model is attached.

Note that although the DTR Sheet also requires simulating a one-phase fault,
this tool will not implement it, as it would require the simulation of a
three-phase model. All simulations are only positive-sequence.

There are two relevant events at play here:
  * `T_{fault}`, time at which the short-circuit takes place. This becomes the
    default reference when checking for compliance times.
  * `T_{clear}`, time at which the line (actually, both Line4a and Line4b) is
    disconnected at both ends.

`T_{clear}` is a parameter that is specified in the DTR and depends on the
voltage level in question.

In this case, since it is a PPM, there are two additional inputs specified by
RTE, besides Udim and `T_{clear}`:
  * Gain constant Kd
  * Gain constant Ki

[**TODO**: Confirm with RTE which are the parameters that these should map
to. Presumably, these parameters correspond to `*_Kc` and `*_Ki`???  (Where "*"
stands for WTG4A, WTG4B, or photovoltaics, depending on the type of PPM units
used.)]


### Initialization

The following values are specified at the PDR bus at the start of the
simulation:
  * P = P_{max_unité}
  * Q = 0
  * U = U_{dim}


### Magnitudes to plot (curves)

The following curves should be extracted from the simulation and plotted in a
graph:

1. Voltage at connection point: modulus of `(bus_terminal_V_re,
   bus_terminal_V_im)`, at the PDR bus.
2. Reactive power supplied at the connection point: sum of `line_Q2Pu` over all
   lines on RTE side.
3. Active power supplied at the connection point: sum of `line_P2Pu` over all
   lines on RTE side.
4. The injected active and reactive currents, "id" and "iq": `*_injector_idPu`,
   `*_injector_iqPu` (for the case of the WindTurbine4AWeccCurrentSource model,
   for example). **Plot all PPM units on the same graph** (for now).
5. Plant-level voltage regulation setpoint: `*_wecc_repc_uRefPu_y`. **Plot all PPM units on the same
   graph** (for now).
6. Magnitude controlled by the Plant-level voltage regulation: modulus of `*_wecc_repc_uPu_re`
   `*_wecc_repc_uPu_im`.  **Plot all PPM units on the same graph** (for now).
7. The PPM's main transformer tap ratio: `tapChanger_tap_value` if it is a transformer with
   an automatic tap changer.

[**TODO:** double check with RTE that the variables for the Plant-level voltage regulation and its
controlled magnitude are the ones chosen here. These two graphs are used in the
rest of the PPM sheets too.]


### Analyses to perform

1. Find the *recovery time* `T_{10P_{floor}}`: time at which the supplied power P
   recovers and stays above -10% of the final value of P (note this is
   not a "tube", but a "floor").
2. Find the *rise time* `T_{85U}`: time at which the voltage at the PDR bus
   returns back above 0.85pu, regardless of any possible
   overshooting/undershooting that may take place later on.


### Compliance checks to perform

1. Check that the generating units remain connected and working: check that the
   protections (if any) have not disconnected any PPM unit.
2. Check that:
   * `(T_{10P_{floor}} - T_{85U}) < 2 sec`
   * `(T_{10P_{floor}} - T_{clear}) < 2 sec`
3. Check that, if Imax is reached, reactive support is prioritized over active
   power supply: check that `*_injector_idPu` **decreases** right after Imax is
   reached.  See the explanation below on how to actually check this.
   

To perform this last check, the code performs the following steps:
  * From the curves of the injected active and reactive currents, "id"
    and "iq" (`*_injector_idPu`, `*_injector_iqPu`), construct the
    curve of the current modulus, i.e., `I = sqrt(id^2 + iq^2)`.
  * If and when this value `I` reaches Imax (take Imax from `WTG4B_IMaxPu`,
    `photovoltaics_IMaxPu`, etc.), we save the value of the active
    current `*_injector_idPu` at that instant of time.
  * Then we check that, at any time **after** this happens, the value
    of `*_injector_idPu` never goes over that value.

[**TODO:** To discuss with RTE: which are the proper variables from which we
should obtain the active and reactive currents injected by the PPM, as well as
how to perform the compliance check regarding these currents and Imax.]




## Sheet I6PPM

_Applies to PPM classes: B, C, D, and Offshore_

Checks for compliant behavior of the generator under a scenario where there is a
severe drop of voltage at the PDR bus (which simulates the effect of a fault).

**Note:** only a symmetric 3-phase fault will be simulated, as the tool does not
model a three-phase system.

Contrary to the modeling that the DTR suggests for this Sheet, which uses a
variable shunt impedance Zv and a short-circuit network impedance Zcc, here the
voltage drop is simulated via a variable Infinite Bus source (Modelica model
`ControllableSource`), directly attached to the PDR bus, and for which we
specify a voltage curve that faithfully follows the shape prescribed by Sheet
I6PPM.

In this Sheet there are several "events", corresponding to the changes in that
voltage curve:
1. At t = `T_{0}`, voltage drops to `U_{fault}`
2. At t = `T_{clear}`, voltage starts ramping up linearly, from
   `U_{fault}` to `U_{rec2}` (reached at t = `T_{rec2}`).
3. At t = `T_{rec2}` the voltage stops ramping up and remains at
   `U_{rec2}` indefinitely.

These values of time and voltage are specified by the DTR as follows. Remember
that the classification of generators into class A, B, C, D, is in the DTR under
Chapter 5, Article 5.1.1, Section 3.  See the reminder in the document
`Summary_data_from_the_DTR.md`).

For PPMs of classes B, C, and Offshore (under 110 kV in this last case):

|  variable       | value              |
|-----------------|--------------------|
|  `U_{initial}`  |  1.0 pu            |
|  `T_{0}`        |  (free)            |
|  `U_{fault}`    |  0.05 pu           |
|  `T_{clear}`    |  `T_{0}` + 150 ms  |
|  `T_{rec2}`     |  `T_{0}` + 1150 ms |
|  `U_{rec2}`     |  0.85 pu           |


For PPMs of class D and Offshore systems at 110 kV and above:

|  variable       | value              |
|-----------------|--------------------|
|  `U_{initial}`  |  1.0 pu            |
|  `T_{0}`        |  (free)            |
|  `U_{fault}`    |  0.0 pu            |
|  `T_{clear}`    |  `T_{0}` + 150 ms  |
|  `T_{rec2}`     |  `T_{0}` + 1500 ms |
|  `U_{rec2}`     |  0.85 pu           |


### Initialization

The following values are specified at the PDR bus at the start of the
simulation:
  * P = P_{max_unité}
  * Q = 0
  * U = U_dim


### Magnitudes to plot (curves)

The following curves should be extracted from the simulation and plotted in a
graph:

1. Voltage at connection point: modulus of `(bus_terminal_V_re,
   bus_terminal_V_im)`, at the PDR bus.
2. Reactive power Q supplied at the connection point. In this case there are no
   connection lines, therefore the flow has to be calculated by means of the
   "terminal equipment" connected at the PDR bus on RTE's side, which in this
   case is one single `ControllableSource` object.
   [TODO: find out what variables are provided by this object, in order to get the PQ flows.]
3. Active power P supplied at the connection point.  Same as for the Q flow
   mentioned above.
4. Plant-level voltage regulation setpoint: `*_wecc_repc_uRefPu_y`. **Plot all PPM units on the same
   graph** (for now).
5. Magnitude controlled by the Plant-level voltage regulation: modulus of `*_wecc_repc_uPu_re`
   `*_wecc_repc_uPu_im`.  **Plot all PPM units on the same graph** (for now).


### Analyses to perform

Same as in Fiche I5PPM:

1. Find the *recovery time* `T_{10P_{floor}}`: time at which the supplied power P
   recovers and stays above -10% of the final value of P (note this is
   not a "tube", but a "floor").
2. Find the *rise time* `T_{85U}`: time at which the voltage at the PDR bus
   returns back above 0.85pu, regardless of any possible
   overshooting/undershooting that may take place later on.


### Compliance checks to perform

1. Check that the generating units remain connected and working: check that the
   protections (if any) have not disconnected any PPM unit.

2. Check that the auxiliary loads also remain stable; in this case this just
   means checking that the load protections (if any) have not disconnected it.

3. Check that:
   * `(T_{10P_{floor}} - T_{85U}) < 2 sec`
   * `(T_{10P_{floor}} - T_{clear}) < 2 sec`




## Sheet I7PPM

_Applies to PPM classes: B, C, D, and Offshore_

Checks for compliant behavior of the PPM under a scenario where there is a
severe overvoltage at the PDR bus (which simulates the effect of clearing a
fault in the network).

**Note:** only a symmetric 3-phase fault will be simulated, as the tool does not
model a three-phase system.

Contrary to the modeling that the DTR suggests for this Sheet, which uses a
variable shunt impedance Zv, here the voltage surge is simulated via a variable
Infinite Bus source (Modelica model `ControllableSource`), directly attached to
the PDR bus, and for which we specify a voltage curve that faithfully follows
the shape prescribed by Sheet I7PPM.

In this Sheet there are several "events", corresponding to the changes in that
voltage curve:
1. At t = `T_{0}`, voltage surges to `U_{surge}`
2. At t = `T_{rec1}`, voltage drops to `U_{rec2}`
3. At t = `T_{rec2}`, voltage drops to `U_{rec3}`
4. At t = `T_{rec3}`, voltage drops to `U_{rec4}`

These values of time and voltage are specified by the DTR as follows:

|  variable       | all Volt Levels    |
|-----------------|--------------------|
|  `U_{initial}`  |  1.0 pu            |
|  `T_{0}`        |  (free)            |
|  `U_{surge}`    |  1.3 pu            |
|  `T_{rec1}`     |  `T_{0}` + 50 ms   |
|  `U_{rec2}`     |  1.25 pu           |
|  `T_{rec2}`     |  `T_{0}` + 2.5 s   |
|  `U_{rec3}`     |  1.15 pu           |
|  `T_{rec3}`     |  `T_{0}` + 30 s    |
|  `U_{rec4}`     |  1.10 pu           |


Note that the simulation should at least go on for another 30s or so, in order
to allow enough time to reach the steady state in cases with long time
oscillations. Therefore, the **minimum duration time** for the simulation should
be 60 seconds plus whatever lead time is used before the first event (i.e.,
`T_{0}` seconds).


### Initialization

Two different simulations are specified by the DTR.

Scenario 1: using the following values at the PDR bus at the start of the
simulation:
  * P = P_{max_unité}
  * Q = Q_{max}
  * U = U_dim

Scenario 2: using the following values at the PDR bus at the start of the
simulation:
  * P = P_{max_unité}
  * Q = Q_{min}
  * U = U_dim


### Magnitudes to plot (curves)

The following curves should be extracted from the simulation and plotted in a
graph (the same as those in I6PPM):

1. Voltage at connection point: modulus of `(bus_terminal_V_re,
   bus_terminal_V_im)`, at the PDR bus.
2. Reactive power Q supplied at the connection point. In this case there are no
   connection lines, therefore the flow has to be calculated by means of the
   "terminal equipment" connected at the PDR bus on RTE's side, which in this
   case is one single `ControllableSource` object.
   [TODO: find out what variables are provided by this object, in order to get the PQ flows.]
3. Active power P supplied at the connection point.  Same as for the Q flow
   mentioned above.
4. The injected active and reactive currents, "id" and "iq": `*_injector_idPu`,
   `*_injector_iqPu` (for the case of the WindTurbine4AWeccCurrentSource model,
   for example). **Plot all PPM units on the same graph** (for now).
5. Plant-level voltage regulation setpoint: `*_wecc_repc_uRefPu_y`. **Plot all PPM units on the same
   graph** (for now).
6. Magnitude controlled by the Plant-level voltage regulation: modulus of `*_wecc_repc_uPu_re`
   `*_wecc_repc_uPu_im`.  **Plot all PPM units on the same graph** (for now).


### Analyses to perform

None.


### Compliance checks to perform

1. Check that the generating units remain connected and working: check that the
   protections (if any) have not disconnected any PPM unit.



## Sheet I10PPM

_Applies to PPM classes: C, D, and Offshore_

Checks for compliant behavior of the PPM under an islanding event scenario,
i.e., the network has been split in such a way that the PPM is left as the only
generating system that should sustain the frequency of its subnetwork. Note,
however, that the DTR assumes that the PPM technology is "grid-following" and
therefore suggests the use of a fictitious **synchronous condenser unit** to
provide inertia and frequency reference for the island.

In this case the network is not modeled. In Dynawo, we simply attach two loads
of type LoadPQ (since the DTR specifies that the loads have alpha=beta=0 and do
not depend on frequency). With PQ values as follows:
  * Load 1: P = 0.7/0.9 Pmax, Q = +/- 0.04 Pmax
  * Load 2: P = +/-0.1 Pmax,  Q = -/+ 0.04 Pmax
  
And then disconnect Load 2. This complies with the initial conditions and the
desired changes specified by the DTR. Note that, since the variations of P and Q
could be either positive or negative, there should be four different scenarios
to simulate:
1.  Load 2: P = +0.1 Pmax, Q = + 0.04 Pmax  (Load 1: P = 0.7 Pmax, Q = -0.04 Pmax)
2.  Load 2: P = +0.1 Pmax, Q = - 0.04 Pmax  (Load 1: P = 0.7 Pmax, Q = +0.04 Pmax)
3.  Load 2: P = -0.1 Pmax, Q = + 0.04 Pmax  (Load 1: P = 0.9 Pmax, Q = -0.04 Pmax)
4.  Load 2: P = -0.1 Pmax, Q = - 0.04 Pmax  (Load 1: P = 0.9 Pmax, Q = +0.04 Pmax)

The relevant event here is `T_{ldshed}`, time at which the load 2 is
disconnected.


### Initialization

At the start of the simulation, all four scenarios have the following values
specified at the PDR bus:
  * P = 0.8 P_{max_unité}
  * Q = 0
  * U = U_dim
  * f = 50 Hz (this is always the default in Dynawo)

Note also that the fictitious synchronous condenser should be modeled with the
parameters prescribed by the DTR Sheet, namely:
  * Xd = Xq = b (reactance value defined for connection lines)
  * Sn = Sn of the PPM
  * H = 1.25 Pmax / Sn


### Magnitudes to plot (curves)

The following curves should be extracted from the simulation and plotted in a
graph:

1. Voltage at connection point: modulus of `(bus_terminal_V_re,
   bus_terminal_V_im)`, at the PDR bus.
2. Reactive power supplied at the connection point: sum of `load_QPu` over all
   loads connected at the PDR bus on RTE side.
3. Active power supplied at the connection point: sum of `load_PPu` over all
   loads connected at the PDR bus on RTE side.
4. Network frequency, with dashed horizontal lines marking the
   compliance limits: 49 Hz and 51 Hz. Take this value from variable
   `generator_omegaRefPu`.
5. Plant-level voltage regulation setpoint: `*_wecc_repc_uRefPu_y`. **Plot all PPM units on the same
   graph** (for now).
6. Magnitude controlled by the Plant-level voltage regulation: modulus of `*_wecc_repc_uPu_re`
   `*_wecc_repc_uPu_im`.  **Plot all PPM units on the same graph** (for now).



### Analyses to perform

None.


### Compliance checks to perform

1. Check that the PPM remains connected and stable:
   a) Check that the PPM protections (if any) have not disconnected any unit.
   b) Check that the island frequency `generator_omegaRefPu` has stabilized to a
      steady-state value.

2. Check that the frequency:
   a) Stays always above 49 Hz.
   b) Stays always below 51 Hz.





# Appendix I: Notes on per-unit conversions

This section deals with the conversion between the per-unit conventions used in
Dynawo and the ones used (or assumed) in the DTR.  Occasionally we will also
mention Eurostag, but the focus is on DTR vs. Dynawo.

## The DTR uses generator-centric pu; Dynawo uses network-centric pu

The quickest way to describe the differences is to realize that the DTR uses a pu system
focused on the generator, while Dynawo uses a pu system based on a system-level choice:
  * The DTR pu system uses:
      - Udim, the voltage at the connection point (PDR bus)
      - Snom, the nominal apparent power of the generator
  * Dynawo pu system uses:
      - Uvl, the network voltage level at the connection point
      - SnRef, the network-wide choice of MVA base, always 100 MVA

Therefore, the conversion, for reactance values, is given by:
```
Xdwo = Xdtr * (Udim^2 / Snom) * (SnRef / Uvl^2)
```
For instance, for the example generator we use in sheets I3, I4, I8:
  * The generator has Snom = 555 MVA and it's connected at HTB2 (in this case, Uvl = 225 kV)
  * We use a specified value of Udim = 235kV (the default for HTB2)
  * Xdtr is specified by the DTR, value b=0.54 pu
Therefore the conversion for the line's reactance X into Dynawo's pu system yields:
```
0.54 * (235^2 / 555) * (100 / 225^2) = 0.10613813
```

The formula for voltages:
```
Vdwo = Vdtr * Udim / Uvl
```

The formula for S, P, or Q:
```
Pdwo = Pdtr * Snom / SnRef
```
